V 1.0 (#8)
Zubax/Komar: README.md

# Zubax Komar

## Overview

Zubax Komar is a high-quality FOC ESC based on [Telega](https://zubax.com/technologies/telega) motor control technology. Komar is designed to support the propulsion systems of light unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) and unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). Komar is compatible with almost all PMSM and BLDC motors and can optimize motor performance by automatically calibrating the motor parameters. It is designed to be a part of an integrated drive but allows operation as a separate unit as well. Komar is one of the reference designs for the [Mitochondrik LV](https://zubax.com/products/mitochondrik-lv) control module.

<p align="center">
<img src="pics/Komar.png" alt="drawing" width="500"/>
</p>

## Brief specs

> * 13 - 51 V input voltage range (4 - 12S LiCoO<sub>2</sub> battery).

Reviewer: Согласно незаконченной документации на Митохондрик, минимальное напряжение 12 V. Почему тут 13?

```suggestion
* 12...51 V input voltage range (4 - 12S LiCoO<sub>2</sub> battery).
```

Author: Вероятно, опечатка

* Up to 2500 W output power (in the whole voltage range of 12S LiCoO<sub>2</sub> battery).
* Maximum continuous phase current amplitude - 100 A.

> *  A software-controllable 5 V, 0.5 A BEC.

Reviewer: Максимальная нагрузка BEC -- дело тонкое. Нужно либо убрать её упоминание, либо указать реалистичные значения.

```suggestion
* A software-controllable 5 V BEC.
```

Author: Текст изменен

* Maximum continuous phase current amplitude - 100 A.
*  A software-controllable 5 V, 0.5 A BEC.
*  Built-in motor temperature sensor for enhanced self-diagnostics.
* Komar supports a rich set of communication interfaces:
  * Double redundant CAN bus interface.
  * USB Micro-B interface for control, management, and telemetry.
  * Industry-standard RC PWM input.

* Komar is manufactured using highly reliable automotive grade AEC-Q qualified components.

  <img src="pics/connectors leds.png" alt="Komar connectors and LEDs placement" style="zoom:50%;"/>

Due to its superb efficiency Komar can operate at high power levels using only a very lightweight and compact heatsink to cool the device down. Komar's theoretical efficiency graph vs output power can be seen below. It should be noted that efficiency tends to decrease with supply voltage. The picture below is correct for 40 V supply voltage which corresponds to a discharged 12S  LiCoO<sub>2</sub> battery. 

![](pics/Efficiency.png)

Komar is designed to be a part of an integrated drive for mid-power motors. It is best suited for the motors with following specs:

* Power level: 1.5 - 2.5 kW

> * Continuous phase current amplitude: 50 - 80 A

Reviewer 2: Так перестраховаться хорошо с одной стороны. Но с другой стороны, сейчас даже самые простые и слабые ESC держат как минимум 60 А DC тока. А мы тут фазный ток 50 А пишем. Да, мы не проводили очень длительных тестов. Но те тесты, что я проводил, показали, что при наличии обдува пропеллером 90 А амплитуды фазного тока он держит. И температура платы при этом не превышает 90 С. Так что я предлагаю все же не занижать характеристики. Иначе мы так ничего не продадим.

Author: ок, пусть будет больше.

> * Power level: 1.5 - 2.5 kW
> * Continuous phase current amplitude: 60 - 90 A
> * Diameter 60 - 80 mm
> * KV > 180 (assuming 12S battery is used)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Continuous power: 2.5 kW
* Continuous phase current amplitude: 90 A
* Outer diameter: 80 mm
* KV > 180 (assuming 12S battery is used)
```

# Zubax Komar

## Overview

Zubax Komar is a high-quality FOC ESC based on [Telega](https://zubax.com/technologies/telega) motor control technology. Komar is designed to support the propulsion systems of light unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) and unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). Komar is compatible with almost all PMSM and BLDC motors and can optimize motor performance by automatically calibrating the motor parameters. It is designed to be a part of an integrated drive but allows operation as a separate unit as well. Komar is one of the reference designs for the [Mitochondrik LV](https://zubax.com/products/mitochondrik-lv) control module.

<p align="center">
<img src="pics/Komar.png" alt="drawing" width="500"/>
</p>

## Brief specs

* 13 - 51 V input voltage range (4 - 12S LiCoO<sub>2</sub> battery).
* Up to 2500 W output power (in the whole voltage range of 12S LiCoO<sub>2</sub> battery).

> * Maximum phase current 100 A. 

Reviewer 2: Для переменного тока обязательно следует уточнять RMS или Amplitude. 
В данном случае 
Maximum continuous phase current amplitude - 100 A.

Author: *

*  A software-controllable 5 V, 0.5 A BEC.
*  Built-in motor temperature sensor for enhanced self-diagnostics.
* Komar supports a rich set of communication interfaces:
  * Double redundant CAN bus interface
  * USB Micro-B interface for control, management, and telemetry
  * Industry-standard RC PWM input

* Komar is manufactured using highly reliable automotive grade AEC-Q qualified components.

  <img src="pics/connectors leds.png" alt="Komar connectors and LEDs placement" style="zoom:50%;"/>

Due to its superb efficiency Komar can operate at high power levels using only a very lightweight and compact heatsink to cool the device down. 

> ![](pics/Efficiency.png)

Reviewer: Откуда картинка? Следует обозначить КПД конкретно чего тут демонстрируется.

Reviewer: Теперь понятно. Не думаю, что график нужен, ведь можно просто сказать, что теоретический потолок ~97%. Долой его.

Author: *

Komar is designed to be a part of an integrated drive for mid-power motors. It is best suited for the motors with following specs:

* Power level: 1.5 - 2.5 kW

> * Current: 50 - 80 A

Reviewer: Continuous phase current amplitude?

Author: *

* Diameter 60 - 80 mm
* KV > 180 (assuming 12S battery is used)

> Despite that Komar still can be used as a separate unit. In this case a custom phase connector mounted on the housing may be used to provide motor connections. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Komar can also be used as a separate unit. In this case, a custom phase connector mounted on the housing may be used to provide motor connections.
```

## Construction and usage

> Komar itself consists of a power stage PCB with mitochondrik and an aluminum housing (and several plastic parts). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Komar itself consists of a power stage PCB with Mitochondrik and an aluminum housing (and several plastic parts).
```

Неплохо бы настроить редактор, чтобы пробелы удалял автоматически.

> <img src="pics/blow scheme.png" alt="Komar blow scheme" style="zoom:100%;"/>

Reviewer: 1. Пожалуйста, как я писал в тикете про design notes, сделайте чертёж в векторном формате, чтобы можно было его включить в даташит.

2. У вас отсутствует lightpipe на схеме, как я уже раньше говорил.

Author: lightpipe появился на взрыв-схеме платы. 
Чертежи стали в векторном формате.

> The housing is kept together using 4 M3.5 screws. Komar mounting is performed using 4 M4 screws. For mounting a motor to the top part of the housing M4 screws should be used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The housing is kept together with 4x M3.5 screws. Komar is mounted using 4x M4 screws. The motor is mounted onto the top part of the housing with M4 screws.
```

Author: +

## Release notes

Newest entries at the top.

> ### Komar V0.3

Reviewer: Предлагаю объявить текущую версию v1.0. Релиз же, нет?

Неплохо бы ещё указать год -- 2020.

Reviewer 2: Я за Komar v1.0. Только год в самом названии указывать не стоит.  Он будет и так указан в релизе.

#### Major PCB updates

* Every component is replaced with its AEC-Q qualified substitute to be compatible with hardware development policies.
* Better and bigger bulk capacitors.
* Holes for adding 3d printed capacitor supports added; capacitor supports  developed (not shown in the pcb).
* All the gate networks re-routed and greatly improved.
* All the LEDs grouped in one place; holes for mounting lightpipe added.
* Holes diameter for power supply wires soldering greatly increased to fit any 12 AWG multi-stand wire.
* Holes diameter for phase wires increased to fit either any 14 AWG multi-stand wire (in the case of motor soldering to the PCB) or 12 AWG single-strand wire (in the case of using the phase connector).

> * YOBA silkscreen logo added.

Reviewer 2: Этот пункт скорее всего вызовет кучу вопросов пользователей и может привести к недопониманию. Давайте его уберем.

Author: *

> * Overcurrent protection trip level increased 1.5 times to around 200 A.

Reviewer 2: ток срабатывания защиты 150 А.

Author: *

Reviewer: Почему вы отметили это выполненным, не изменив при этом текст?

* TVS diodes replaced with ones with lower reverse standoff voltage (51 V).

#### Major housing changes

* Housing halves are now held together with 4 M3.5 screws instead of M3.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Из-за этой пустой строки у вас список рендерится с большими межстрочными интервалами.
<img width="83" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3298404/83960346-7e8abd00-a890-11ea-9120-5f3f4ed6a94d.png">

* Housing itself is now mounted on the chassis using 4 M4 screws (was M3).
* Wall thickness of the top part of the housing increased from 1 to 1.6 mm.
* Connector window is slightly smaller now.
* Totally different construction of the phase connector. It became much bigger and now should fit up to 6 mm bullet connectors (previously 3.5 mm bullet connectors were used).
* Phase connector is now supposed to use single stranded thick stiff copper wires instead of flexible multi-stranded ones.    
* All the LEDs are grouped in one place now. Holes for the LEDs moved.
* Lightpipe for the LEDs added (will be manufactured inhouse using 3d printing).
* 3D printed spacers between the PCB and the housing added. 
* Slightly improved heatsink efficiency by redesigning the fins.
* 3 M2.5 holes for mounting optional (and not yet developed) connector protection cap added
* Optional power connector assembly  mount added. 

> 

Reviewer: У вас отсутствует предыдущая версия. Можно добавить v0.2 и просто сказать, что это первая, указав заодно год выпуска (2019).

Author: Ок
